.. _research:

==========
 Research
==========

I am a `GIScientist <http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/giscc/units/u002/>`_ 
with a strong methodological emphasis in the areas of
spatial data analysis, spatial econometrics, regional modeling and
geocomputation. My substantive interests run from regional economic
inequality, growth and convergence, to spatial criminology, urban
dynamics, segregation and epidemiology. I have long been interested in
the development, use, and impact of open source for spatial analysis.

Current and Recent Projects
===========================

CyberGIS Software Integration for Sustained Geospatial Innovation
-----------------------------------------------------------------
*National Science Foundation*

Originally developed by geographers in the mid-1960s, Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) have flourished since that time. In the
foreseeable future, GIS software will continue to play essential roles
for breaking through scientific challenges in numerous fields and
improving decision-making practices with broad societal impacts.
However, fulfilling such roles is increasingly dependent on the ability
to handle very large spatiotemporal data sets and complex analysis
software based on synthesizing computational and spatial thinking
enabled by cyberinfrastructure, which conventional GIS-based software
approaches do not provide.

This project will establish CyberGIS as a fundamentally new software
framework comprising a seamless integration of cyberinfrastructure, GIS,
and spatial analysis/modeling capabilities. Specifically, the project
will:

 * Engage a multidisciplinary community through a participatory approach in evolving CyberGIS software requirements;
 * Integrate and sustain a core set of composable, interoperable, manageable, and reusable CyberGIS software elements based on community-driven and open source strategies;
 *  Empower high-performance and scalable CyberGIS by exploiting spatial characteristics of data and analytical operations for achieving unprecedented capabilities for geospatial knowledge discovery;
 * Enhance an online geospatial problem solving environment to allow for the contribution, sharing, and learning of CyberGIS software by numerous users, which fosters the development of education, outreach, and training programs crosscutting multiple disciplines;
 * Deploy and test CyberGIS software by linking with national and international cyberinfrastructure to achieve scalability to significant sizes of geospatial problems, cyberinfrastructure resources, and user communities; and
 * Evaluate and improve the CyberGIS framework through domain science applications and vibrant partnerships to gain better understanding of the complexity of coupled human-natural systems.
 * The CyberGIS software framework will shift the current paradigm of GIS and associated spatial analysis/modeling software to create scalable and sustainable software ecosystems while achieving groundbreaking scientific advances in understanding coupled human-natural systems that would be impossible otherwise. These advances will, for example, dramatically advance the understanding of disaster preparedness and response and impacts of global climate change. This framework will empower high-performance and collaborative geospatial problem solving and serve as a key driver for the interoperability of international cyberinfrastructure based on broad engagement of user communities related to GIS for both research and education purposes.

The project will establish an industrial partnership with the Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI), collaborations with the Department of Energy's Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) National Map Project, and international partnerships with several institutions in Australia, China, and the United Kingdom to effectively extend the benefits to the nation and society in significant ways.

Flexible Geospatial Visual Analytics and Simulation Technologies to Enhance Criminal Justice Decision Support Systems
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*National Institute of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice*


This project builds upon the extensive expertise and proven track record
of the research team at ASU’s GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis and
Computation to develop a flexible methodological framework, integrating
new techniques for geospatial visual analytics and spatial econometrics
with state of the art geocomputation technologies to yield the basis for
an enhanced decision support system for criminal justice interventions.
In addition to methodological efforts, the research will yield an open
source and cross-platform modular software toolbox that will be
delivered through a multitude of user interfaces. These include
traditional free standing desktop software, toolbox extensions to
commercial GIS, web services and integration into the immersive virtual
reality environment embedded in ASU’s Decision Theater.

The research consists of a three-phase project over three years
(2010-12), with each phase yielding a well-defined set of deliverables,
progressing from exploratory analysis to explanatory modeling and
culminating with the integration of these models into a simulation
environment at the core of a geospatial decision support system. In each
phase, progress is made along three dimensions of inquiry: (i)
refinement and development of new methods of visual analytics and
geospatial data analysis to visualize, interpret and simulate criminal
events; ii(ii) incorporation of state of the art methods into user
friendly and high performance open source software tools; (iii)
application of the methods and tools in carefully designed case studies,
in close cooperation with our Police partners. Methodological
contributions will be made to the fields of Exploratory Spatial Data
Analysis (ESDA), Spatial Econometrics and Spatial Decision Support
Systems, and include the extension of space-time exploratory analysis
and econometrics and the incorporation of explicit network structures.

The software tools aspect of the project builds upon the distinguished
tradition of tools developed by Anselin and Rey, which includes
SpaceStat, GeoDa and STARS. The new software is incorporated into the
modular, open source and cross platform PySAL library, which allows for
delivery of functionality through different user interfaces. To ensure
rapid dissemination of new findings and tools to the practice of
policing, empirical case studies are carried out in close collaboration
with distinguished centers of crime analysis in the Southwest.

Spatial Analytical Framework for Examining Sex Offender Residency Issues Over Space and Time
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*National Science Foundation*

Sexual assault is a serious problem, with long term social and
psychological impacts. Nationally visible cases of sex offenders who
recidivated after release into the community have prompted state and
federal legislators and local communities to focus on the public safety
risk posed by offenders and the most appropriate means of dealing with
this unique population. With recidivism rates for convicted offenders
around 15% in the U.S., and substantially higher for the more violent
and deviant, the risk faced by communities is real. The monitoring and
management of convicted sex offenders is therefore a major policy
consideration in the United States. Passed in 1994, the Jacob Wetterling
Crimes Against Children and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act
mandated that U.S. states register individuals convicted of sex crimes
against children. Additional modifications, including the recent Adam
Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act (2006), require that agencies
monitor the whereabouts of convicted offenders for at least fifteen
years, and up to a lifetime. Local jurisdictions have also extended
these federally mandated requirements for convicted offenders with
increasingly punitive ordinances that ban offenders from living within a
specified distance of locations where children congregate, like schools
and playgrounds, and imposing dispersion and saturation statutes that
limit the number of offenders living within a community or local area.

This research will develop a spatial analytical framework and toolbox
for addressing convicted sex offender residency issues, facilitating
access to a combination of new and existing exploratory and confirmatory
statistical methods as well as new and existing spatial optimization
models for analyzing impacts and evaluating/developing public policy
associated with the management of convicted sex offenders.

Spatial Linkages and Urban Economic Development
-----------------------------------------------
*Economic Development Administration*

This research project (2009-2010) reﬁned the existing tools available to economic development practitioners by integrating state-of-the-art geocomputation and visualization methods into a practitioner-friendly decision support toolkit. This toolkit allows for the monitoring of the level of spatial linkage between communities in an urban context as well as provides for comparative analysis with user-defined areas from across the country. It relies on an extensive cross-sectional data set that covers the entire set of census tracts for the United States over the decades of 1990-2000 and which is constructed as part of the research effort. Econometric analysis of this dataset provides an important contribution to the current literature on urban economic development, which is dominated by cross-sectional case studies and coarser spatial scales.

**Project Components**

 #. Development of a time consistent set of spatial boundaries for neighborhoods in the largest 359 US metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) for 1990 and 2000
 #. Deriving new spatially explicit measures to objectively define neighborhood boundaries in each period
 #. Construction of measures of spatial neighborhood change that are applicable at the census tract, neighborhood, and MSA scale
 #. An exploratory spatial data analysis of the associations between these indices of neighborhood change and the socioeconomic characteristics of the urban context
 #. Implementation of these new measures in a ﬂexible open source toolkit for economic development practitioners

.. include:: links.txt
